*Microsporidia MB* is an obligate intracellular endosymbiont shown to impair the transmission of *Plasmodium falciparum* in *Anopheles arabiensis* mosquitoes. The endosymbiont has been shown to be transmitted through two main mechanisms including vertical and horizontal transmission among mosquito populations with vertical transmission entailing transmission from infected mothers to their offsprings while horizontal transmission involves transmissions between males and females sexually. In addition, it posseses specific tissue localization patterns with documented occurrences in the ovaries, testis, guts, fat body and the carcass. However, the primary tissues of mosquito infection with *Microsporidia MB* are the reproductive tissues while the rest constititute the secondary tissues of infection. Further, recent studies have shown that the endosymbiont is not only present in *An. arabiensis* mosquitoes but also in other members of Anopheles mosquitoes including *An. gambiae s.s*, *An. fenustus*, and *An. coluzzi*. Strikingly, mosquito infection with this endosymbiont does not confer fitness costs in infected mosquties making it a novel biological control strategy for *Plasmodium falciparum* transmission blocking in infected mosquitoes. While all those aspects have been determined, key questions that underpin the development of a *Microsporidia MB* dissemination strategy remain unknown. Case in point, the mechanistic basis that the endosymbiont uses in blocking the transmission of *Plasmodium falciparum* in infected mosquitoes. Previous studies have shown that endosymbionts use three key strategies to block the transmission of diseases by their vectors including: host immmune priming, competition for host resources and the production of toxins. In this study, we aimed to elucidate the existing interaction between the host and the symbiont as a step towards determining the mechanism the endosymbiont uses in blocking the transmission of *Plasmodium falciparum*.
